Band F
Policy making decisions
decides the strategy, policy and implementation for a national/regional organisation, major subsidiary or several business units/functions. sets the strategic intent for the organisation/ subsidiary/ business units/ functions, and normally holds national or international authority, influencing the industry sector and/ or country. coordinates the economic, social, technological or political contexts for the entire organisation.

there is often considerable uncertainty through lack of information and time pressure, and decisions made with no certain knowledge of the outcome and probabilities will have a long-term impact. solves mission critical problems where clues are abstract, and the outcome affects the entire organisation, industry or country. attention has to be focussed on the global, national and regional environment, and the organisation’s capability to respond.

extensive knowledge, skill and experience extending beyond own work sphere, organisation or group. decisions may only impact the organisation five to ten years in the future, and an adverse decision may threaten the future well-being of the entire organisation. 
parameters are wide and are usually only restricted by the law, shareholders, social and economic conditions. normally sits on main board of directors. normally signs off organisation wide policy and sits on the main board of directors. normally accountable for the entire organisation, subsidiaries or several business units. business parameters are wide, and are usually only restricted by the law, shareholders, and social and economic conditions. could be  a director of the board in charge

Subgroups
participates as an active member of the main board responsible for on-going development of the long-term strategy for the organisation/major subsidiary, functions and/or business units. designs the data/intelligence gathering process for his/her own area of expertise within the context of the organisation’s current and future product/services. participates in the process, and in the overall strategic management of the organisation and its major entities for long-term performance and the satisfaction of the shareholders. chairs at least one board committee. as ceo leads, co-ordinates and manages the board and the organisation as a whole. frequent decisions under definite pressure – workload only allows for occasional breaks in the decision making process, and the work is complex and causes elements of uncertainty. numerous decisions under real pressure. regular deadlines bring definite time stress, and the decision making process extends throughout the day and often beyond. decisions are often taken in conditions of considerable uncertainty. immediate decisions taken under considerable pressure. there are numerous conflicting deadlines requiring immediate decisions, and priorities and conditions are constantly changing. errors become appreciable and costly. they may be cumulative in effect consisting of poor management, ineffective administrative/control procedures and involve a number of people or substantial material or a major legal liability. errors resulting in a substantial reduction in financial expectation. for example, possible loss of potential business, faulty senior appointments, poor organisation design, faulty evaluation of methods of operation to be used. errors seriously affecting the organisation and its ability to operate efficiently. for example, faulty long-term decisions, not generating and developing resources for expansion and diversification; and failing to make a decision. understands the market intelligence gathering process. thinks strategically for the organisation as a whole. strong leadership skills and a broad but detailed knowledge of the market and shareholder requirements

Band E
Programming Decisions

the execution of the corporate policy and strategy set by the top management (band f) is broadly planned and scheduled for the entire organisation/subsidiaries, and/or major business units/operating divisions/functions, generally by a senior management team.

the complexity of work at this level arises from the need as a management team, to optimise resource allocation/utilisation across the company, and to translate strategy into action and performance. teamwork and leadership are key components to effectiveness at the senior management level. the senior management team develops the long-term plan (normally 5 plus years) for the organisation as a whole. the team decides on priorities and operational objectives for major functions, the relationship between major functions, the co-ordination of action and the allocation of new/exiting resources across the major functions and amongst departments and projects.

decisions are made on the overall organisation structure, broad plans, programmes and budgets for the execution of organisation policy within the major functions. data are many, varied and often complicated. decisions may be made under conditions of considerable uncertainty of information and with little or no possible knowledge of their outcome probabilities. surrounding conditions cannot be fully anticipated in advance and incumbents must be able to incorporate unforeseen circumstances into their plans/programmes. the impact of decisions may only become apparent in the long term.

attention needs to be focused on the global, national and regional environment, and the necessity to ensure that the organisation remains operationally and financially viable. relevant in depth knowledge and experience of the organisation, industry, country and region required. may be viewed as group wide specialists/experts who advise/innovate in their area, and are usually industry authorities in their field of expertise.

Subgroups

participates as an active member of the team responsible for the long-term plan/s, programmes and/or budgets, translating strategy into action for a strategic entity. the focus is at divisional/business unit/functional level. specialists at this level are part of the team and work across the strategic entity or are seen to be a national authority in his/her field of expertise. co-ordinates the team responsible for the long-term plan/s, programmes and/or budgets, translating strategy into action for a unit/organisational level.
specialist at this level are seen to be national/world authorities in their field of expertise. frequent decisions under definite pressure – workload only allows for occasional breaks in the decision making process, and the work is complex and causes elements of uncertainty. numerous decisions under great pressure. regular deadlines bring definite time stress, and the decision making process extends throughout the day and often beyond. decisions are often taken in conditions of considerable uncertainty. immediate decisions taken under considerable pressure. there are numerous conflicting deadlines requiring immediate decisions, and priorities and conditions are constantly changing. manages a relatively small component of the organisation, or if a specialist, coordinates the specific operation/strategic effort across the organisation. manages a major operational component of an organisation, and/or co-ordinates the long-term operational planning process for the organisation as a whole. a specialist at this level is a national/world authority in his/her own filed. work is guided by general principles and overall plans and programmes. complexity of work is such that a definite measure of autonomy has been delegated. assessment of results is done through regular reports and broad comparison. performance against business plan and budget may be seen earlier but not final results. overall assessment of performance is only meaningful after a period of approximately one year. organisational results are measured and reported at board level. incumbent has numerous conflicting organisational priorities and objectives, which must be attained over a given period – often long-term. it is not customary to apply controls and checks on a regular basis at this level. emphasis is placed on operational results, collegial discussion and co-operation. this includes the examination of trends, and the manner in which a balance is kept between conflicting objectives. errors become appreciable and costly. they may be cumulative in effect consisting of poor management, ineffective administrative/control procedures and may involve a number of people or substantial material or a major legal liability. errors resulting in a substantial reduction in financial expectation. for example, faulty evaluation of methods of operation to be used and the administration thereof. errors seriously affecting the organisation and its ability to operate efficiently. for example, faulty long-term decisions, not developing and identifying resources for expansion and diversification; and failing to make a decision. operational problem solving at this level involves participating as a full member of the senior management team in the development of the long term integrated, cross functional operational plans. these turn strategy into action for the organisation as a whole. an important component of this task (planning 5 years ahead at least) is the identification of priorities and the allocation of resources over time. manages a component of the organisation, for example, production, operations, finance at senior management level. the leader of the senior management team mentioned above, or ‘world class’ specialists on peer review.

Band D
Interpretive Decisions
interprets the overall business plan, programmes, and strategies formulated at bands f and e, and develops the required best practice, operational systems, rules, regulations and budgets to achieve the business goals of his/her particular department/unit/function area/discipline. understands the ‘why’ behind the business plan and strategy, the environment in which the business operates, and how these impact onto the organisation as a whole, and onto his/her own area. may assist with the development of long-term operational planning process (at band e), and have insight into the long-term operational plans. at the senior level, has the ability, and is expected to interpret such plans and extrapolate information to predict future operational requirements/outcomes up to approximately 2 to 3 years ahead, within own discipline.
understands the detailed operations / processes of own business/ function area, and where necessary, the operational coordination and integration of other related functions of the business within the organisation. the complexity of the work is the co-ordinated development of work design, organisation, operational/ business plans, budget and the management of the day to day operations. complexity increases with the mix of disciplines managed or co-ordinated.
data are many and varied. there is some uncertainty regarding information available, possible outcomes of decisions and their probabilities. surrounding conditions/environment may vary widely and cannot easily be anticipated. forecasts and projections become part of the decision making process. decisions involve determining the means by which the long-term plan can be translated into operational plans and schedules. decisions are taken to choose the best option from a range of possible courses of action (for example, the best utilisation of resources- men, finance, equipment and so on) to achieve the pre-set targets. some decisions may set precedents, correct solutions are not always obvious and may contradict across the specific work areas or with the organisation itself. the impact of these decisions may sometimes only be determined in the medium term (approximately 1 to 2 years). can be project managers able to handle major (complex) projects, and who are responsible for the design, planning, budgeting, staffing and managing of such projects within agreed action plan. can be specialists who are company experts who require the creativity to develop solutions in the absence of guiding precedent/s. can be others who may be recognised authorities in a number of fields of expertise (such as a doctor or pilots of commercial airlines or light aircraft with commercial licenses).

Subgroups
to achieve the agreed strategic and operational objectives, the incumbent interprets the long-term plan developed at the senior management level in respect of the discipline/function for which he/she is responsible. most frequently, the planning and decisions cover work design, work organisation, systems, procedures, budget and management of daily operations and projects. standard operating procedures (sop’s) are not always in place to guide decision making, and these have to be developed. specialists work across the whole organisation, and should have an in depth understanding of the functions and problems to be addressed in each area.
the span of control is wide, with responsibility for managing approximately 5 or more direct and indirect reports, of various disciplines, with supporting structures. the variety and complexity of tasks is greater due to the different disciplines requiring co-ordination within the department. project managers able to handle major (complex) projects, are responsible for the design, planning budgeting, staffing and managing of such projects to meet time and budget constraints. specialists who are company experts with the same level of understanding, but are expected to be able to innovate or be creative in the development of solutions for which there is no precedent.
frequent decisions taken under variable pressure. the flow of work is continuous, and demands of varying intensity and duration. it is often associated with volume and or deadlines. frequent decisions taken under variable pressure. the flow of work is continuous, and makes demands of varying intensity and duration. it is often associated with volume and or deadlines. numerous decisions taken under great pressure. there is definite time stress, and decision-making extends throughout the day and often beyond. decisions are often taken in conditions of considerable uncertainty. direct supervision of band ‘d’ subordinates is not required, but there should be close liaison with, and development of, the lower levels of jobs. minimal supervisory responsibility over the first line ‘d’ band and/ several ‘c’ band subordinate jobs. there is still an involvement in mentoring and guiding staff, and or co-ordinating the activities of staff towards specific objectives. is responsible for the allocation of work, the deployment of staff, the quality of output, and if necessary the initiation of disciplinary action for first and second line ‘d’ band and lower level jobs. co-ordinates activities within a department or between departments. work assignments are subject to general review by relevant authority after completion. the incumbent is skilled at this level, and completes the work on his/her own. this includes developing work methods according to general directives, policies and specialised professional standards, and managing and coordinating a number of diverse resources to achieve operational goals. feedback is received after weekly and or monthly checks. work is guided by general principles and overall programmes. the incumbent consults with superior on major issues relating to general principles or policies. works under broad assignments according to general directions, policies and programmes. controls are applied largely through discussion, examination of indices and discussion of work programme. assessment of cause of inefficiency generally made within two months. in the context of band d, errors are appreciable, but with limited effects through either cost or injury. this includes low level legal liability. errors become appreciable and costly. they may be cumulative in effect, consisting of poor supervision, ineffective administration procedures involving several people, or substantive material, or a legal liability. errors resulting in a substantial reduction in financial expectation (for example faulty evaluation of the methods of operation to be used and their administration). is competent in managerial work which involves the interpretation of the long term plans, programmes and budgets developed at higher level, and then the planning of how the work should be carried out. the job incumbent has interpersonal and leadership skills. a specialist will be able to work across the whole organisation and understand the way in which each area functions and the problems which have to be addressed. this includes project management skills. co-ordination between other departments is a key requirement including the joint development of plans, programmes, budgets, sop’s and coordination of workflows. specialists are company experts with the same level of understanding described above but are expected to apply knowledge or creativity to the development of solutions for which there may be no precedent. they are further required to be acknowledged by outside research organisations as experts in a field important to the operations of the organisation. decision making at the level shown above. is expected to provide worked proposals/ recommendations for the strategic stance of the organisation in the functional areas and its relationships with other functional areas. assists with the development of the long term operational planning process (band ‘e’). has insight into the long term operational plans. has the ability and is expected to interpret such plans and extrapolate information to predict future operational requirements/ outcomes up to 3 years ahead within the discipline.

Band C
Process Decisions
the work in this decision band is governed by the plans, rules and regulations already established at ‘d band’ and above.  this is skilled operational work of a technical and or professional nature. the job incumbent is expected to understand how operations are integrated, and be able to apply the theory, trade knowledge and or relevant skill underpinning the particular operation, process or system. the complexity varies from deal with relatively simple operations/ systems to a number of complex integrated systems/operations/ processes. the incumbent needs to analyse the requirements of the situation, and decide which part of the theory and knowledge to draw on to manage the operation/s successfully.
the incumbent is expected to function within own skills area normally with indirect supervision, and decisions are not normally regarded as setting precedent. may be expected to coordinate the work of a section or work area and be accountable for resources, quality and volume, with supervision from middle management. as a technical specialist, may evaluate systems and processes, and make recommendations in a specialist field.
decisions are made on pre-determined information and instructions, and are considered ‘deterministic’. the job incumbent does not have to consider the ‘why’, or the long-term effect; he/she is interested in the ‘what’ and ‘how’ to achieve the objective/s.

the incumbent must have considerable knowledge of the theory, techniques, products, processes, regulations and precedents within his her/own discipline. formal and technical qualifications, on the job training and or experience are necessary to ensure the relevant understanding and ability to operate successfully within own discipline (normally a minimum of 3 years plus required). this decision band may incorporate junior management, technical specialists and possibly senior operators; can be first line supervisors and or foremen responsible for co-ordination of a section or work area; can be project leaders of projects planned at band ‘d’, or projects limited in scope to the skills area of the incumbent and within existing business plans/budgets.

Subgroups
the work involves relatively simple systems/operations/processes that are interrelated. once trained, the inter-relationship between them is easily understood. applies own skill and knowledge of the theory and systems/ operations/ processes to carry out simple diagnoses, and solve problems. routinely applies standardised methods to solve problems or to create reports. the systems/operations/processes are more complex, and require a higher level of education, training and experience. uses skill and knowledge to diagnose and solve problems. draws from a range of learned standardised methods to deal with a range of issues/ problems.
there are a number of complex systems that must be understood. involves complex diagnosis. draws on a range of knowledge and skills to work out methods from first principles, and achieve specific objectives. there is a continuous flow of work requiring constant attention, and occasional increases in activity in order to reach deadlines. frequent, but relatively minor decisions taken under variable pressure. work flow is continuous and makes demands of varying intensity and duration often associated with volumes and or deadlines. work load is such that there are few breaks from the decision making process, and the nature of the work is complex and causes elements of uncertainty. direct supervision of band ‘c’ subordinates is not required, but there should be close liaison with, and development of, the lower levels of jobs. minimal supervisory responsibility over first line ‘c’ band and or several ‘b’ band subordinate jobs. there is still an involvement in mentoring and guiding staff, and or co-ordinating the activities of staff towards specific objectives. is responsible for the allocation of work, the deployment of staff, the quality of output, and if necessary the initiation of disciplinary action for first and second line ‘c’ band and lower level jobs. co-ordinates activities within a department or between departments. volume and variety of work is such that it is not possible to check all that is done, instructions relate to the general work to be undertaken. supervision is restricted spot checks, progress and results. feedback is obtained at the time or on a daily basis. the incumbent is skilled at this level and completes the work on his/her own. controls are applied after a task has been completed. feedback- checks occur weekly and or monthly. control are indirect (for example, selective secondary checks in clerical procedures and checking the work of independent operators, foreman and supervisors). controls applied largely through discussion and examination of relevant results against the work programme. errors resulting in minor damage for which there are corrective procedures. the cost is usually wasted time and labour and limited materials-possible injury to self. actions or decisions may result in moderate damage or loss of time, affecting the wider work environment (larger than immediate section but smaller than whole department). mistakes will be detected on completion of an assignment when work is checked for quality and quantity. could cost time and money to correct. actions, recommendations or decisions may result in significant financial loss or lost time within the department, and may affect the decisions of others. mistakes are only detected when supervisors conduct spot checks on completed work. formal training/development culminating in a recognised diploma, trade certificate, professional qualification or similar of not less than 3 years; or formal training/development towards a recognised diploma, trade certificate, professional qualification or similar, of not less than 2 years, together with at least one year ‘on the job’ practical development to support the formal training; formal training/development culminating in a recognised advanced diploma, trade or professional qualification or similar (such as articles, srn qualifications) of not less than 4 or 5 years; or; university degree and or similar competency gained through equivalent tertiary education/qualifications; and or similar level of qualifications, with recognised prior learning/experience, not less than 5 years.

Band B
Automatic Decisions
this involves work in which the processes (an integrated combination of activities or operations) are already specified, and freedom of choice is restricted to the operations within the process. job incumbents are not yet fully skilled, and do not have to understand the whole process.
the operative or clerical work requires the application of some practical skills and/or acquired knowledge to selects, and automatically implement, the appropriate operation/s from a variety of elements/procedures (such as driving a car).
there is little complexity, and problems re normally solved based on past experience. the work is procedural, and with direct supervision, errors are identified within a very short time (approximately 1 day to 2 weeks). impact of judgment is generally within own work area, but dependent upon the type of operation, may affect several other or sub sections.
at higher levels within this decision band, the incumbent may need to understand the context in which the job exists, and its relationship with surrounding work areas. the incumbent may carry out multiple tasks using own discretion, as alternative courses of action cannot always be pre-determined. the basic skills can be taught in training, but before acceptable standards of performance can be reached, additional experience and practice is necessary, so that correct decisions, normally based on precedent can be made automatically. jobs in this decision band are not yet fully skilled, and the training and experience required is generally from one month up to 2 plus years. the work in this decision band is normally operative, basic administrative or finance, and lower level support services.

Subgroups
the cycle of activities is limited and once the acceptable level of basic skill has been reached, the job becomes semi-repetitive. involves the application of practical skills or acquired knowledge to undertake a well-defined but limited range of activities and operations, which are a part of an established routine. there is some need for individual judgement where decisions cannot be prejudged.

assuming normal secondary education, the incumbent can be taught familiarity with the basic equipment/forms/clerical operations and how to make decisions within 3 to 4 weeks, or within approximately 3 months if taught on the job. once an acceptable level of basic skill is reached, the job becomes semi-repetitive. there is little or no ambiguity as the majority of the job is procedural and the guidelines for decision-making clear. selects and automatically implements the appropriate operation/s from a variety of elements/activities/procedures which make up the job, but is not permitted to adapt them to unusual circumstances (requires supervisor approval). the job may however, require certain skill in a variety of operations performed in a section/subsection or sub discipline (for example, creditors). the job still remains semi-repetitive. additional training is normally required where all operations can be learned and the incumbent is left to work unsupervised: with formal training after 4 to 6 months, and on the job training/experience in approximately 1 year. selects, and automatically implements from a variety of procedures in response to clear cues. various decisions may have to be made for which there are no standard operating procedures (sop’s) or established guidelines. can carry out all the section/departmental operational routines. at higher levels, the incumbent needs to understand the context in which the job exists, and its relationship with surrounding work areas. training and/or experience required (approximately 2 to 3 weeks). work is normally performed without haste, but on occasions the work load peaks and there is an element of speed required in order to reach deadlines. there is a continuous flow of work requiring constant attention, and occasional increases in activity in order to reach deadlines. frequent, but relatively minor decisions taken under variable pressure. work flow is continuous and makes demands of varying intensity and duration often associated with volumes and/or deadlines. direct supervision of band ‘b’ subordinates is not required, but there should be close liaison with, and development of, the lower levels of jobs. minimal supervisory responsibility over first line ‘b’ band and/or several ‘a’ band subordinate jobs. there is still an involvement in mentoring and guiding staff, and/or co-ordinating the activities of staff towards specific objectives. is responsible for the allocation of work, the deployment of staff, the quality of output, and if necessary the initiation of disciplinary action for first and second line ‘b’ band and lower level jobs. simple, regular checks are necessary to spot flaws in the work. these are applied frequently – there is little opportunity to operate inefficiently. work is reviewed upon completion of short assignments by the supervisor for quality and quantity. the job incumbent imposes simple checks, and has the scope to make mistakes during the assignments prior to the supervisory check. volume and variety of work is such that it is not possible for the supervisor to check all that is done. instructions relate to the general work that needs to be done, and the incumbent determines work methods from general existing alternatives according to established procedures and standards. supervision is restricted to progress and results. feedback checks occur weekly and/or monthly. basic secondary education. requires the ability to read, write, perform simple arithmetic calculations, become familiar with standardized procedures and basic equipment, and be able to communicate verbally. basic secondary education, plus formal training of 4 to 6 months, and ‘on the job experience’ of approximately one year. requires the ability to make effective use of relatively complex machines/equipment, r drive relatively complex or heavy-duty vehicles or operate plant machinery; if the job is in the clerical or support services fields, requires the ability to prepare standard letters or perform routine calculations (for example, calculation of fractions, percentages and decimals), and give clear verbal instructions;
though work practices are repetitive, some experience in dealing with exceptions and special circumstances is required. experience may be related to the specific tasks involved, or on wider issues affecting the operations as a whole. generally requires a post-secondary education of basic occupational skills and equivalent competency, and ‘on the job experience’ of approximately 2 to 3 years.
proficiency is required in an occupational skill, and experience of a variety of relatively complex tasks. the skill may be related to specific activities, or equipment, or general activities.

Band A
Defined Decisions
the process and/or cycle of operations are clearly laid down and are self-evident. the job incumbent is told what is to be done, why, where and when. the work usually involves using basic tools and/or equipment to fulfil parts of the operation. work is normally carried under direct supervision, and the job incumbent rarely has to understand the interrelationship of his/her job with others.
simple reasoning capabilities within standard work routines. there may be some tasks where the work is more demanding, with a variety of activities (such as carrying out the clerical functions of recording, adding, subtracting and filing)
decisions are concerned with the functional movements and actions and/or the speed of the work (for example, decides when to start/stop machine, or decided whether to sweep the room from right to left). training and experience is generally limited (a few hours to a few days). however, extended training and experience may be required up to 8 weeks, if the operations become slightly more complex.

Subgroups
very simple defined tasks with minimal variety. tasks are predominantly of manual labouring nature (for example, fetching, carrying, loading); or, if clerical simply involving transfer of information from one document to another. direct supervision, low to medium effort most of the time. requires little or no training. (1 hour to a few days). generally procedural work where there is a variety of processes and a cycle of activities, which may require up to 6 – 8 weeks on the job training. once taught, the incumbent can be left on his/her own, and be expected to carry out the job effectively. this includes clerical/stores and operator jobs where the process and procedures can be learned within a specified period of time. accuracy is not a key requirement as the job incumbent is normally monitored and supervised to avoid error. accuracy is required, and training is aimed at ensuring this, particularly in clerical, accounting, stores and operator jobs. supervision is generally carried out at the end of each task. little or no pressure. only simple decisions are taken, and these are quite clearly laid down. there is no ambiguity. work is normally performed without haste. deadlines may increase pressure slightly. no ambiguity, but pressure may arise from the requirement for some seed, a certain amount of accuracy, and/or heavy physical effort, or working in an unpleasant/unsafe environment for long periods of the day. simple, defined tasks with no complexity. generally receives close supervision. works according to detailed or standard instructions. errors or poor work will be seen within a very short period of time. the incumbent does not have to know his/her job fits in with any others to complete the job satisfactorily. tasks sufficiently complex to require frequent assistance and checks. errors will be seen within a very short period of time. job incumbent imposes certain simple checks on himself or herself, but has scope to make mistakes, as supervisory checks are less frequent. there is generally little implied need for reading or writing. basic verbal skills, plus limited on the job training of a few hours in simple manual activities is required. the activities or task/s require no prior experience. basic secondary education. requires the ability to read, write and understand simple verbal and written instructions. instructions are normally given verbally, but basic written procedures may be provided. experience of the work place of up to one month, with on the job training of up to one month. basic secondary education. requires the ability to read, write, and perform simple arithmetic calculations (adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing). adequate verbal skill required at a non-technical level. familiarity with simple, standardised work procedures is required. generally over one month and up to 3 months on the job training is required.

